---
layout: post
title: How to vim
---

# Description

## Short version (200 chars)
Want to start viming your way around? Here's a good place to start

## Long
To be done

## [Links](#links)
[Presentation]([https://speakerdeck.com/brunamoreira/building-comminities-and-bridges](https://gist.github.com/BrunaNayara/cdf7cf97ee0bd64e175d2121ff343f7a)https://gist.github.com/BrunaNayara/cdf7cf97ee0bd64e175d2121ff343f7a)

# Contents

## How to vim

Basics and not so basics for future vimers


## Why vim?

- Not the easiest
- But always there
- Good for small things
- Easy setup


## First things first

You can exit by typing **:q!**

## Modes

Vim has different modes. We'll cover some of them here
- Normal
- Insert
- Visual
- Command


### Normal mode

It's the default mode, and where you can move around.
You can use these to move the cursor:
- arrow keys (basic)
- **hjkl** as arrow keys <v^> (very advanced)
- **w** goes to next **w**ord
- **e** goes to **e**nd of word
- **b** goes back to **b**eggining of words


Now we can combine number and letters (omg why? just because we can)
- 3j goes down 3 lines
- 5k goes up 5 lines
- same goes for **h**, **l**, **w**, **e**, and **b**


- [ ] Show **:set relativenumber**


But maybe you want to move more in a line... That's ok
- **0** goes to the beggining of the line (0th char)
- **^** goes to the first non-blank character
- **$** goes to the end of the line


Enough with lines. You wanna move more
- **gg** goes to first line
- **G** goes to last line


### Insert mode

Now that we know how to move, we can start editing right?
Okay, alright? I get it.

You can use a bunch of different things to start editing
- **i** **i**nserts where the cursor is
- **I** **i**nserts in the beginning of line
- **a** **a**dds in the next character
- **A** **A**dds in the end of line
- **o** **o**pens a new line below
- **O** **o**pens a new line above


### Visual mode

We can visually select things
- **v** character **v**isual mode
- **V** line **v**isual mode
- **ctrl+v** block **v**isual mode


### More normal mode stuff (Operators)

- **yy** copy line (**y**ank)
- **y** copy visually selected
- **p** **p**aste after
- **P** **p**aste before
- **dd** **d**elete line
- **D** **d**elete forward


> While we're talking about copying and pasting, we can talk about pasting from the clipboard (not from vim)
> You should enter insert mode and use OS paste command (ctrl+v or cmd+v)


- **>>** shift right
- **<<** shift left
- **~** swap case
- **gu** make lowercase
- **gU** make uppercase


### Combining things

You can combine things to make your life a bit easier

- **dw** **d**elete **w**ord
- **yw** copy word
- **cw** **c**ange **w**ord
- **ci(** **c**hange **i**nside **(**


### Searching for patterns


<!--
TODO: set hlsearch
-->

I need to find the occurrences of something in a file
- **?word** searches for word
- **n** goes to next occurrence
- **N** goes to previous occurrence

Alternatively, you can select the word under the cursor
- **#** highlights all the occurrences of the word under the cursor


### Command mode

- **:q** quits vim
- **:w** saves file (write)
- **:q!** forces quit (without saving)
- **:wq** saves and quit
- **:wqa** saves and quit all
- **:number** goes to line number


> Special comment to say you don't need to quit vim to go back to the terminalo
> You can use **ctrl+z** as it suspends (doesn't interrupt) terminal processes


In this mode, you can setup your preferences

- **:set nu** sets number
- **:set relativenumber** sets relative numbers

These preferences can be saved in the **vimrc** file and that's basically it


## Tabs

You can open many tabs to work on many files if you want
- **:tabe** Opens a new tab for editing
- **:tabe FILEPATH** Opens a new tab for editing a file
- **:tabe .** Opens the current folder for selecting a file


Ok, you have too many tabs now, how do you go to each of them?
- **gt** **g**oes to next **t**ab
- **gT** **g**oes to previous **t**ab
- **3gt** **g**oes to **t**ab number 3


## Splitting screen

Cool, tabs are cool. But noy you want to split your screen, because you always want more...
There's a couple of ways to do this. I'm going over only one. Enough is enough right?

- **Ctrl + w** to enter window controlling

And combine it with some other commands

- **s** **s**plit window
- **v** split **v**ertically

Now you can make the windows bigger and/or smaller

- **N+** Adds N lines below
- **N-** Removes N lines from below

- **N>**


Moving from a place to another

- **Ctrl + w** to enter window controlling

And combine again

We need to remember the moving buttons (hjkl)

- **l** go to the window in the right
- **h** go to the window in the left
- **j** go to the window below
- **k** go to the window above


Let's move things around

- **Ctrl + w** to enter window controlling

And combine again

We need to remember the moving buttons (hjkl)

- **L** move window to the right
- **H** move window to the left
- **J** move the window below
- **K** move the window above


## Search and replace

Searching and replacing nedds a bit of knowledge of REGEX

> **:%s/searching_pattern/replacing_word/options


### Where to search and replace

- **%** means the whole file will be searched
- **1,10** means lines 1 to 10 (separate them with **,**)
- visually select the portion you need and type **:s**



### Searching pattern

Here you can use your REGEX knowledge (out of scope of this)



### Useful options

- **g** All occurences in line (otherwise only first)
- **c** Confirmation before replacing


## Registers

If you're not yet, you'd be mad with me. But why is that?

Because you might run into this scenario:

1. You **y** copy a line
1. You want to delete another line to paste the one you just copied
1. Cool, you're smart and **dd** delete the line
1. Then you **p** paste and you have the line you just **dd**ed

**INFURIATING**

Worry not!
You about to become vim-smarter!



We have a magical thing called **REGISTERS**
It's basically a storage for strings

- **:reg** shows you the registers list

When you copy or delete something you change the content of the "default" register
And when you paste, that's the register vim uses.
But we can change that!

- **"** is the character that access a register
- **0** is the yank **yy** register


So now we can paste using our new knowledge
- **"0p** pastes the content of the yank register
- **"ap** pastes the content of the register a


## Macros

Repeating things!

We have the mini macro **.**

- **.** repeats the last change

Your last change can be deleting, pasting, whatever
> A change starts when you enter insert mode and stops when going back to normal mode


You can create your own macros. YAY!!

- **qa** starts recording a macro in register "a

You choose you register and start having fun

1. **qa** starts
1. Start your changes
1. Not only insert mode changes
1. **q** in normal mode to stop recording

You can see your macro on the **:reg**

And you can execute your macro with **@a** (a being the reg you chose)

Don't forget we can always (always? not sure) combine things

- **10@a** executes your macro in **:reg a** 10 times


## Marks

You can mark and get back to it

- **m{a-z}** **M**arks that place and save it in a {a,z}
- **`{a-z}** goes to {a,z} mark

## Jumps

- **ctrl+o** goes to older jump
- **ctrl+i** goes to newer jump

## Tags

When working on a project you might need to jump into definitions
Use ctags to generate them.

- **ctrl+]** to jump to the definition
- **:tag {method name}** to jump to the definition

Or from terminal
> vim -t method-name

## Plugins

Plugin managers

- I use **vundle** to manage


Useful plugins
- git gutter
- black

# References

vim game: https://vim-adventures.com/

vim movement cheat sheet: https://vim.rtorr.com/


# Further info

You can see this presentation in vim. It is best viewed using [Presenting vim][1] and [figlet][2]

[1]: https://github.com/sotte/presenting.vim
[2]: http://www.figlet.org/
